A repository of data and training materials that accompanies the TRAC Webinar: 'Data reuse, digital literacy and the Roman Rural Settlement Project'.

Abstract

'Data re-use, digital literacy and the Roman Rural Settlement Project: Structured deposition in Roman Britain'
Dr Nicky Garland, Archaeology Data Service - University of York

Archaeological advocates for FAIR data, namely that which is Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Reusable, now form part of a chorus of voices across digital humanities (Marwick et al., 2017). In Britain the archaeological data deluge (e.g. Bevan, 2015) has been tempered in many ways to make this data Findable, Accessible and Interoperable, however, there has been a distinct lack of data reuse. This deficit is partly attributable to the nature of academia, which appears to assign a higher importance on primary data creation, but also due to a general lack of digital literacy training in standard archaeological curricula (Garstki, 2022). 

The Archaeology Data Service (ADS) is the leading accredited digital repository for heritage data generated by UK-based fieldwork and research. The ADS is an advocate for FAIR data and many of our collections are Open Access and are available to download via our website to facilitate reuse by the heritage sector. These archives include several large-scale specialist collections that relate to understanding of Roman Britain, including the Roman Rural Settlement Project (RRSP) database, which is widely visited and downloaded but rarely reused in academic research. 

In this paper I will discuss the barriers to data reusability in Roman studies and how we can overcome these limitations. I will then demonstrate how easy it is to access, download and manipulate data from the RRSP archive to prepare it for immediate reuse. This talk will demonstrate how RRSP data can be reused to undertake original research and better understand facets of the Roman world. In this case how the ubiquitous evidence for the structured deposition of human remains on rural sites in Britain changed across the Late Iron Age and Roman period. All code and data outputs will be available for attendees before the talk via the speaker's Github account.
